code: introduction
title: Introduction
--- |

    Application developers deal with data day-in-day-out. Databases, batch files, message queues, logs, dumps, archive etc etc. It's all about data. However, a application developer's view of data is very different from a data analysts view (even though they may be looking at the same dataset).

    An application developer is trained to view data in the form of Entities and their Relationships. Entities have attributes and some times Relationships have attributes too. There is a whole discipline around data modeling that concerns itself with defining entities and their relationships. The primary concerns of an application developer are what we call _CRUD_ (Create, Read, Update, Delete). In addition to CRUD, an application developer is also concerned with publishing changes to data, writing audit logs to provide traceability etc.

    On the other hand, a data analyst looks at Data as a set of observations. The observations are made by some application and recorded for analysis. The analysts usually gets these observations in the form of csv, json, db dumps or any other data format and starts working off them. At times, the data analyst would get access to a copy of the application data and is expected to convert it into a format that lends itself better for data analysis tasks.

    While the statistics textbooks mostly use data samples that are hand collected (e.g. a survey of households from Los Angeles city), but that's more because of legacy reasons. Today, most of the analysis work is performed on data generated by applications.

    As an application developer, if and when you branch out into the world of data analysis, you need to go through this change of mental model about data. Instead of thinking about data in the form of Entities, Relationships and CRUD operations, you need to start thinking about data as Observations that you need to tidy up and draw meanings from.
